Title: Household Stories by the Brothers Grimm

Author: Jacob Grimm and Wilhelm Grimm

Illustrator: Walter Crane

Translator: Lucy Crane

Release Date: August 17, 2006 [EBook #19068]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HOUSEHOLD STORIES ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net





HOUSEHOLD STORIES

GRIMM




[Illustration: THE SLEEPING BEAUTY

     "--AT LAST HE CAME TO THE
     TOWER & OPENED THE DOOR
     OF THE LITTLE ROOM WHERE
     ROSAMOND LAY."]




HOUSEHOLD
STORIES,
FROM
THE COLLECTION OF THE BROS:
GRIMM:

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN
BY
LUCY CRANE;
AND
DONE INTO PICTURES
BY
WALTER CRANE

DOVER
PUBLICATIONS, INC.

NEW YORK




This new Dover edition, first published in 1963, is an unabridged
republication of the work first published by Macmillan and Company in
1886.


_Standard Book Number: 486-21080-4_

_Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 64-16327_


Manufactured in the United States of America
Dover Publications, Inc.
180 Varick Street
New York, N. Y. 10014




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS


    HALF-TITLE.

    THE SLEEPING BEAUTY.                 _Frontispiece_

    TITLE-PAGE.                                    PAGE

    THE RABBIT'S BRIDE, Headpiece                     1
                        Tailpiece                     2

    SIX SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE, Headpiece                3
                             Tailpiece                8

    CLEVER GRETHEL, Headpiece                         9
                    Tailpiece                        11

    THE DEATH OF THE HEN, Headpiece                  12
                          Tailpiece                  13

    HANS IN LUCK, Headpiece                          14
                  Tailpiece                          19

    THE GOOSE GIRL                    _To face page_ 20
                  Headpiece                          20
                  Tailpiece                          25

    THE RAVEN, Headpiece                             26
               Tailpiece                             31

    THE FROG PRINCE, Headpiece                       32
                     Tailpiece                       36

    CAT AND MOUSE IN PARTNERSHIP, Headpiece          37
                                  Tailpiece          39

    THE WOLF AND THE SEVEN KIDS, Headpiece           40
                                 Tailpiece           42

    FAITHFUL JOHN                     _To face page_ 43
                 Headpiece                           43
                 Tailpiece                           51

    THE WONDERFUL MUSICIAN, Headpiece                52
                            Tailpiece                55

    THE TWELVE BROTHERS, Headpiece                   56
                         Tailpiece                   61

    THE VAGABONDS, Headpiece                         62
                   Tailpiece                         64

    THE BROTHER AND SISTER, Headpiece                65
                            Tailpiece                71

    RAPUNZEL                          _To face page_ 72
           Headpiece                                 72
           Tailpiece                                 75

    THE THREE LITTLE MEN IN THE WOOD, Headpiece      76
                                      Tailpiece      81

    THE THREE SPINSTERS, Headpiece                   82
                         Tailpiece                   84

    HANSEL AND GRETHEL, Headpiece                    85
                        Tailpiece                    92

    THE WHITE SNAKE                   _To face page_ 93
                  Headpiece                          93
                  Tailpiece                          97

    THE STRAW, THE COAL, AND THE BEAN, Headpiece     98
                                       Tailpiece     99

    THE FISHERMAN AND HIS WIFE, Headpiece           100
                                Tailpiece           108

    THE GALLANT TAILOR, Headpiece                   109
                        Tailpiece                   117

    ASCHENPUTTEL, Headpiece                         118
                  Tailpiece                         125

    THE MOUSE, THE BIRD, AND THE SAUSAGE, Headpiece 126
                                          Tailpiece 127

    MOTHER HULDA                     _To face page_ 128
              Headpiece                             128
              Tailpiece                             131

    LITTLE RED-CAP, Headpiece                       132
                    Tailpiece                       135

    THE BREMEN TOWN MUSICIANS, Headpiece            136
                               Tailpiece            139

    PRUDENT HANS, Headpiece                         140
                  Tailpiece                         144

    CLEVER ELSE, Headpiece                          145
                 Tailpiece                          148

    THE TABLE, THE ASS, AND THE STICK, Headpiece    149
                                       Tailpiece    159

    TOM THUMB, Headpiece                            160
               Tailpiece                            166

    HOW MRS. FOX MARRIED AGAIN, Headpiece           167
                                Initial             169
                                Tailpiece           170

    THE ELVES, Headpiece                            171
               Initial                              173
               Initial                              174
               Tailpiece                            174

    THE ROBBER BRIDEGROOM            _To face page_ 175
                      Headpiece                     175
                      Tailpiece                     178

    MR. KORBES, Headpiece                           179
                Tailpiece                           180

    TOM THUMB'S TRAVELS, Headpiece                  181
                         Tailpiece                  185

    THE ALMOND TREE _To face page_                  186
                        Headpiece                   186
                        Tailpiece                   194

    OLD SULTAN, Headpiece                           195
                         Tailpiece                  197

    THE SIX SWANS                    _To face page_ 198
               Headpiece                            198
               Tailpiece                            203

    THE SLEEPING BEAUTY, Headpiece                  204
                         Tailpiece                  207

    KING THRUSHBEARD, Headpiece                     208
                      Tailpiece                     212

    SNOW-WHITE                       _To face page_ 213
             Headpiece                              213
             Tailpiece                              221

    THE KNAPSACK, THE HAT, AND THE HORN, Headpiece  222
                                         Tailpiece  227

    RUMPELSTILTSKIN, Headpiece                      228
                     Tailpiece                      231

    ROLAND, Headpiece                               232
            Tailpiece                               235

    THE GOLDEN BIRD,                 _To face page_ 236
                  Headpiece                         236
                  Tailpiece                         243

    THE DOG AND THE SPARROW, Headpiece              244
                             Tailpiece              247

    FRED AND KATE, Headpiece                        248
                   Tailpiece                        255

    THE LITTLE FARMER, Headpiece                    256
                       Tailpiece                    261

    THE QUEEN BEE, Headpiece                        262
                   Tailpiece                        264

    THE GOLDEN GOOSE, Headpiece                     265
                      Tailpiece                     269




THE RABBIT'S BRIDE


THERE was once a woman who lived with her daughter in a beautiful
cabbage-garden; and there came a rabbit and ate up all the cabbages. At
last said the woman to her daughter,

"Go into the garden, and drive out the rabbit."

"Shoo! shoo!" said the maiden; "don't eat up all our cabbages, little
rabbit!"

"Come, maiden," said the rabbit, "sit on my tail and go with me to my
rabbit-hutch." But the maiden would not.

Another day, back came the rabbit, and ate away at the cabbages, until
the woman said to her daughter,

"Go into the garden, and drive away the rabbit."

"Shoo! shoo!" said the maiden; "don't eat up all our cabbages, little
rabbit!"

"Come, maiden," said the rabbit, "sit on my tail and go with me to my
rabbit-hutch." But the maiden would not.

Again, a third time back came the rabbit, and ate away at the cabbages,
until the woman said to her daughter,

"Go into the garden, and drive away the rabbit."

"Shoo! shoo!" said the maiden; "don't eat up all our cabbages, little
rabbit!"

"Come, maiden," said the rabbit, "sit on my tail and go with me to my
rabbit-hutch."

And then the girl seated herself on the rabbit's tail, and the rabbit
took her to his hutch.

"Now," said he, "set to work and cook some bran and cabbage; I am going
to bid the wedding guests." And soon they were all collected. Would you
like to know who they were? Well, I can only tell you what was told to
me; all the hares came, and the crow who was to be the parson to marry
them, and the fox for the clerk, and the altar was under the rainbow.
But the maiden was sad, because she was so lonely.

"Get up! get up!" said the rabbit, "the wedding folk are all merry."

But the bride wept and said nothing, and the rabbit went away, but very
soon came back again.

"Get up! get up!" said he, "the wedding folk are waiting." But the bride
said nothing, and the rabbit went away. Then she made a figure of straw,
and dressed it in her own clothes, and gave it a red mouth, and set it
to watch the kettle of bran, and then she went home to her mother. Back
again came the rabbit, saying, "Get up! get up!" and he went up and hit
the straw figure on the head, so that it tumbled down.

And the rabbit thought that he had killed his bride, and he went away
and was very sad.




SIX SOLDIERS OF FORTUNE


THERE was once a man who was a Jack-of-all-trades; he had served in the
war, and had been brave and bold, but at the end of it he was sent about
his business, with three farthings and his discharge.

"I am not going to stand this," said he; "wait till I find the right man
to help me, and the king shall give me all the treasures of his kingdom
before he has done with me."

Then, full of wrath, he went into the forest, and he saw one standing
there by six trees which he had rooted up as if they had been stalks of
corn. And he said to him,

"Will you be my man, and come along with me?"

"All right," answered he; "I must just take this bit of wood home to my
father and mother." And taking one of the trees, he bound it round the
other five, and putting the faggot on his shoulder, he carried it off;
then soon coming back, he went along with his leader, who said,

"Two such as we can stand against the whole world."

And when they had gone on a little while, they came to a huntsman who
was kneeling on one knee and taking careful aim with his rifle.

"Huntsman," said the leader, "what are you aiming at?"

"Two miles from here," answered he, "there sits a fly on the bough of an
oak-tree, I mean to put a bullet into its left eye."

"Oh, come along with me," said the leader; "three of us together can
stand against the world."

The huntsman was quite willing to go with him, and so they went on till
they came to seven windmills, whose sails were going round briskly, and
yet there was no wind blowing from any quarter, and not a leaf stirred.

"Well," said the leader, "I cannot think what ails the windmills,
turning without wind;" and he went on with his followers about two miles
farther, and then they came to a man sitting up in a tree, holding one
nostril and blowing with the other.

"Now then," said the leader, "what are you doing up there?"

"Two miles from here," answered he, "there are seven windmills; I am
blowing, and they are going round."

"Oh, go with me," cried the leader, "four of us together can stand
against the world."

So the blower got down and went with them, and after a time they came to
a man standing on one leg, and the other had been taken off and was
lying near him.

"You seem to have got a handy way of resting yourself," said the leader
to the man.

"I am a runner," answered he, "and in order to keep myself from going
too fast I have taken off a leg, for when I run with both, I go faster
than a bird can fly."

"Oh, go with me," cried the leader, "five of us together may well stand
against the world."

So he went with them all together, and it was not long before they met a
man with a little hat on, and he wore it just over one ear.

"Manners! manners!" said the leader; "with your hat like that, you look
like a jack-fool."

"I dare not put it straight," answered the other; "if I did, there would
be such a terrible frost that the very birds would be frozen and fall
dead from the sky to the ground."

"Oh, come with me," said the leader; "we six together may well stand
against the whole world."

So the six went on until they came to a town where the king had caused
it to be made known that whoever would run a race with his daughter and
win it might become her husband, but that whoever lost must lose his
head into the bargain. And the leader came forward and said one of his
men should run for him.

"Then," said the king, "his life too must be put in pledge, and if he
fails, his head and yours too must fall."

When this was quite settled and agreed upon, the leader called the
runner, and strapped his second leg on to him.

"Now, look out," said he, "and take care that we win."

It had been agreed that the one who should bring water first from a far
distant brook should be accounted winner. Now the king's daughter and
the runner each took a pitcher, and they started both at the same time;
but in one moment, when the king's daughter had gone but a very little
way, the runner was out of sight, for his running was as if the wind
rushed by. In a short time he reached the brook, filled his pitcher full
of water, and turned back again. About half-way home, however, he was
overcome with weariness, and setting down his pitcher, he lay down on
the ground to sleep. But in order to awaken soon again by not lying too
soft he had taken a horse's skull which lay near and placed it under his
head for a pillow. In the meanwhile the king's daughter, who really was
a good runner, good enough to beat an ordinary man, had reached the
brook, and filled her pitcher, and was hastening with it back again,
when she saw the runner lying asleep.

"The day is mine," said she with much joy, and she emptied his pitcher
and hastened on. And now all had been lost but for the huntsman who was
standing on the castle wall, and with his keen eyes saw all that
happened.

"We must not be outdone by the king's daughter," said he, and he loaded
his rifle and took so good an aim that he shot the horse's skull from
under the runner's head without doing him any harm. And the runner awoke
and jumped up, and saw his pitcher standing empty and the king's
daughter far on her way home. But, not losing courage, he ran swiftly to
the brook, filled it again with water, and for all that, he got home ten
minutes before the king's daughter.

"Look you," said he; "this is the first time I have really stretched my
legs; before it was not worth the name of running."

The king was vexed, and his daughter yet more so, that she should be
beaten by a discharged common soldier; and they took counsel together
how they might rid themselves of him and of his companions at the same
time.

"I have a plan," said the king; "do not fear but that we shall be quit
of them for ever." Then he went out to the men and bade them to feast
and be merry and eat and drink; and he led them into a room, which had a
floor of iron, and the doors were iron, the windows had iron frames and
bolts; in the room was a table set out with costly food.

"Now, go in there and make yourselves comfortable," said the king.

And when they had gone in, he had the door locked and bolted. Then he
called the cook, and told him to make a big fire underneath the room, so
that the iron floor of it should be red hot. And the cook did so, and
the six men began to feel the room growing very warm, by reason, as they
thought at first, of the good dinner; but as the heat grew greater and
greater, and they found the doors and windows fastened, they began to
think it was an evil plan of the king's to suffocate them.

"He shall not succeed, however," said the man with the little hat; "I
will bring on a frost that shall make the fire feel ashamed of itself,
and creep out of the way."

So he set his hat straight on his head, and immediately there came such
a frost that all the heat passed away and the food froze in the dishes.
After an hour or two had passed, and the king thought they must have all
perished in the heat, he caused the door to be opened, and went himself
to see how they fared. And when the door flew back, there they were all
six quite safe and sound, and they said they were quite ready to come
out, so that they might warm themselves, for the great cold of that room
had caused the food to freeze in the dishes. Full of wrath, the king
went to the cook and scolded him, and asked why he had not done as he
was ordered.

"It is hot enough there: you may see for yourself," answered the cook.
And the king looked and saw an immense fire burning underneath the room
of iron, and he began to think that the six men were not to be got rid
of in that way. And he thought of a new plan by which it might be
managed, so he sent for the leader and said to him,

"If you will give up your right to my daughter, and take gold instead,
you may have as much as you like."

"Certainly, my lord king," answered the man; "let me have as much gold
as my servant can carry, and I give up all claim to your daughter." And
the king agreed that he should come again in a fortnight to fetch the
gold. The man then called together all the tailors in the kingdom, and
set them to work to make a sack, and it took them a fortnight. And when
it was ready, the strong man who had been found rooting up trees took it
on his shoulder, and went to the king.

"Who is this immense fellow carrying on his shoulder a bundle of stuff
as big as a house?" cried the king, terrified to think how much gold he
would carry off. And a ton of gold was dragged in by sixteen strong men,
but he put it all into the sack with one hand, saying,

"Why don't you bring some more? this hardly covers the bottom!" So the
king bade them fetch by degrees the whole of his treasure, and even then
the sack was not half full.

"Bring more!" cried the man; "these few scraps go no way at all!" Then
at last seven thousand waggons laden with gold collected through the
whole kingdom were driven up; and he threw them in his sack, oxen and
all.

"I will not look too closely," said he, "but take what I can get, so
long as the sack is full." And when all was put in there was still
plenty of room.

"I must make an end of this," he said; "if it is not full, it is so much
the easier to tie up." And he hoisted it on his back, and went off with
his comrades.

When the king saw all the wealth of his realm carried off by a single
man he was full of wrath, and he bade his cavalry mount, and follow
after the six men, and take the sack away from the strong man.

Two regiments were soon up to them, and called them to consider
themselves prisoners, and to deliver up the sack, or be cut in pieces.

"Prisoners, say you?" said the man who could blow, "suppose you first
have a little dance together in the air," and holding one nostril, and
blowing through the other, he sent the regiments flying head over heels,
over the hills and far away. But a sergeant who had nine wounds and was
a brave fellow, begged not to be put to so much shame. And the blower
let him down easily, so that he came to no harm, and he bade him go to
the king and tell him that whatever regiments he liked to send more
should be blown away just the same. And the king, when he got the
message, said,

"Let the fellows be; they have some right on their side." So the six
comrades carried home their treasure, divided it among them, and lived
contented till they died.




CLEVER GRETHEL


THERE was once a cook called Grethel, who wore shoes with red heels, and
when she went out in them she gave herself great airs, and thought
herself very fine indeed. When she came home again, she would take a
drink of wine to refresh herself, and as that gave her an appetite, she
would take some of the best of whatever she was cooking, until she had
had enough;--"for," said she, "a cook must know how things taste."

Now it happened that one day her master said to her,--

"Grethel, I expect a guest this evening; you must make ready a pair of
fowls."

"Certainly, sir, I will," answered Grethel. So she killed the fowls,
cleaned them, and plucked them, and put them on the spit, and then, as
evening drew near, placed them before the fire to roast. And they began
to be brown, and were nearly done, but the guest had not come.

"If he does not make haste," cried Grethel to her master, "I must take
them away from the fire; it's a pity and a shame not to eat them now,
just when they are done to a turn." And the master said he would run
himself and fetch the guest. As soon as he had turned his back, Grethel
took the fowls from before the fire.

"Standing so long before the fire," said she, "makes one hot and
thirsty,--and who knows when they will come! in the meanwhile I will go
to the cellar and have a drink." So down she ran, took up a mug, and
saying, "Here's to me!" took a good draught. "One good drink deserves
another," she said "and it should not be cut short;" so she took another
hearty draught. Then she went and put the fowls down to the fire again,
and, basting them with butter, she turned the spit briskly round. And
now they began to smell so good that Grethel saying, "I must find out
whether they really are all right," licked her fingers, and then cried,
"Well, I never! the fowls are good; it's a sin and a shame that no one
is here to eat them!"

So she ran to the window to see if her master and his guest were coming,
but as she could see nobody she went back to her fowls. "Why, one of the
wings is burning!" she cried presently, "I had better eat it and get it
out of the way." So she cut it off and ate it up, and it tasted good,
and then she thought,

"I had better cut off the other too, in case the master should miss
anything." And when both wings had been disposed of she went and looked
for the master, but still he did not come.

"Who knows," said she, "whether they are coming or not? they may have
put up at an inn." And after a pause she said again, "Come, I may as
well make myself happy, and first I will make sure of a good drink and
then of a good meal, and when all is done I shall be easy; the gifts of
the gods are not to be despised." So first she ran down into the cellar
and had a famous drink, and ate up one of the fowls with great relish.
And when that was done, and still the master did not come, Grethel eyed
the other fowl, saying, "What one is the other must be, the two belong
to each other, it is only fair that they should be both treated alike;
perhaps, when I have had another drink, I shall be able to manage it."
So she took another hearty drink, and then the second fowl went the way
of the first.

Just as she was in the middle of it the master came back. "Make haste,
Grethel," cried he, "the guest is coming directly!" "Very well, master,"
she answered, "it will soon be ready." The master went to see that the
table was properly laid, and, taking the great carving knife with which
he meant to carve the fowls, he sharpened it upon the step. Presently
came the guest, knocking very genteelly and softly at the front door.
Grethel ran and looked to see who it was, and when she caught sight of
the guest she put her finger on her lip saying, "Hush! make the best
haste you can out of this, for if my master catches you, it will be bad
for you; he asked you to come to supper, but he really means to cut off
your ears! Just listen how he is sharpening his knife!"

The guest, hearing the noise of the sharpening, made off as fast as he
could go. And Grethel ran screaming to her master. "A pretty guest you
have asked to the house!" cried she.

"How so, Grethel? what do you mean?" asked he.

"What indeed!" said she; "why, he has gone and run away with my pair of
fowls that I had just dished up."

"That's pretty sort of conduct!" said the master, feeling very sorry
about the fowls; "he might at least have left me one, that I might have
had something to eat." And he called out to him to stop, but the guest
made as if he did not hear him; then he ran after him, the knife still
in his hand, crying out, "Only one! only one!" meaning that the guest
should let him have one of the fowls and not take both, but the guest
thought he meant to have only one of his ears, and he ran so much the
faster that he might get home with both of them safe.




The DEATH of the HEN


ONCE on a time the cock and the hen went to the nut mountain, and they
agreed beforehand that whichever of them should find a nut was to divide
it with the other. Now the hen found a great big nut, but said nothing
about it, and was going to eat it all alone, but the kernel was such a
fat one that she could not swallow it down, and it stuck in her throat,
so that she was afraid she should choke.

"Cock!" cried she, "run as fast as you can and fetch me some water, or I
shall choke!"

So the cock ran as fast as he could to the brook, and said, "Brook, give
me some water, the hen is up yonder choking with a big nut stuck in her
throat." But the brook answered, "First run to the bride and ask her for
some red silk."

So the cock ran to the bride and said,

"Bride, give me some red silk; the brook wants me to give him some red
silk; I want him to give me some water, for the hen lies yonder choking
with a big nut stuck in her throat."

But the bride answered,

"First go and fetch me my garland that hangs on a willow." And the cock
ran to the willow and pulled the garland from the bough and brought it
to the bride, and the bride gave him red silk, and he brought it to the
brook, and the brook gave him water. So then the cock brought the water
to the hen, but alas, it was too late; the hen had choked in the
meanwhile, and lay there dead. And the cock was so grieved that he
cried aloud, and all the beasts came and lamented for the hen; and six
mice built a little waggon, on which to carry the poor hen to her grave,
and when it was ready they harnessed themselves to it, and the cock
drove. On the way they met the fox.

"Halloa, cock," cried he, "where are you off to?"

"To bury my hen," answered the cock.

"Can I come too?" said the fox.

"Yes, if you follow behind," said the cock.

So the fox followed behind and he was soon joined by the wolf, the bear,
the stag, the lion, and all the beasts in the wood. And the procession
went on till they came to a brook.

"How shall we get over?" said the cock. Now in the brook there was a
straw, and he said,

"I will lay myself across, so that you may pass over on me." But when
the six mice had got upon this bridge, the straw slipped and fell into
the water and they all tumbled in and were drowned. So they were as
badly off as ever, when a coal came up and said he would lay himself
across and they might pass over him; but no sooner had he touched the
water than he hissed, went out, and was dead. A stone seeing this was
touched with pity, and, wishing to help the cock, he laid himself across
the stream. And the cock drew the waggon with the dead hen in it safely
to the other side, and then began to draw the others who followed behind
across too, but it was too much for him, the waggon turned over, and all
tumbled into the water one on the top of another, and were drowned.

So the cock was left all alone with the dead hen, and he digged a grave
and laid her in it, and he raised a mound above her, and sat himself
down and lamented so sore that at last he died. And so they were all
dead together.




HANS IN LUCK


HANS had served his master seven years, and at the end of the seventh
year he said,

"Master, my time is up; I want to go home and see my mother, so give me
my wages."

"You have served me truly and faithfully," said the master; "as the
service is, so must the wages be," and he gave him a lump of gold as big
as his head. Hans pulled his handkerchief out of his pocket and tied up
the lump of gold in it, hoisted it on his shoulder, and set off on his
way home. And as he was trudging along, there came in sight a man riding
on a spirited horse, and looking very gay and lively. "Oh!" cried Hans
aloud, "how splendid riding must be! sitting as much at one's ease as in
an arm-chair, stumbling over no stones, saving one's shoes, and getting
on one hardly knows how!"

The horseman heard Hans say this, and called out to him,

"Well Hans, what are you doing on foot?"

"I can't help myself," said Hans, "I have this great lump to carry; to
be sure, it is gold, but then I can't hold my head straight for it, and
it hurts my shoulder."

"I'll tell you what," said the horseman, "we will change; I will give
you my horse, and you shall give me your lump of gold."

"With all my heart," said Hans; "but I warn you, you will find it
heavy." And the horseman got down, took the gold, and, helping Hans up,
he gave the reins into his hand.

"When you want to go fast," said he, "you must click your tongue and cry
'Gee-up!'"

And Hans, as he sat upon his horse, was glad at heart, and rode off with
merry cheer. After a while he thought he should like to go quicker, so
he began to click with his tongue and to cry "Gee-up!" And the horse
began to trot, and Hans was thrown before he knew what was going to
happen, and there he lay in the ditch by the side of the road. The horse
would have got away but that he was caught by a peasant who was passing
that way and driving a cow before him. And Hans pulled himself together
and got upon his feet, feeling very vexed. "Poor work, riding," said he,
"especially on a jade like this, who starts off and throws you before
you know where you are, going near to break your neck; never shall I try
that game again; now, your cow is something worth having, one can jog on
comfortably after her and have her milk, butter, and cheese every day,
into the bargain. What would I not give to have such a cow!"

"Well now," said the peasant, "since it will be doing you such a favour,
I don't mind exchanging my cow for your horse."

Hans agreed most joyfully, and the peasant, swinging himself into the
saddle, was soon out of sight.

And Hans went along driving his cow quietly before him, and thinking all
the while of the fine bargain he had made.

"With only a piece of bread I shall have everything I can possibly want,
for I shall always be able to have butter and cheese to it, and if I am
thirsty I have nothing to do but to milk my cow; and what more is there
for heart to wish!"

And when he came to an inn he made a halt, and in the joy of his heart
ate up all the food he had brought with him, dinner and supper and all,
and bought half a glass of beer with his last two farthings. Then on he
went again driving his cow, until he should come to the village where
his mother lived. It was now near the middle of the day, and the sun
grew hotter and hotter, and Hans found himself on a heath which it would
be an hour's journey to cross. And he began to feel very hot, and so
thirsty that his tongue clove to the roof of his mouth.

"Never mind," said Hans; "I can find a remedy. I will milk my cow at
once." And tying her to a dry tree, and taking off his leather cap to
serve for a pail, he began to milk, but not a drop came. And as he set
to work rather awkwardly, the impatient beast gave him such a kick on
the head with his hind foot that he fell to the ground, and for some
time could not think where he was; when luckily there came by a butcher
who was wheeling along a young pig in a wheelbarrow.

"Here's a fine piece of work!" cried he, helping poor Hans on his legs
again. Then Hans related to him all that had happened; and the butcher
handed him his pocket-flask, saying,

"Here, take a drink, and be a man again; of course the cow would give no
milk; she is old and only fit to draw burdens, or to be slaughtered."

"Well, to be sure," said Hans, scratching his head. "Who would have
thought it? of course it is a very handy way of getting meat when a man
has a beast of his own to kill; but for my part I do not care much about
cow beef, it is rather tasteless. Now, if I had but a young pig, that is
much better meat, and then the sausages!"

"Look here, Hans," said the butcher, "just for love of you I will
exchange, and will give you my pig instead of your cow."

"Heaven reward such kindness!" cried Hans, and handing over the cow,
received in exchange the pig, who was turned out of his wheelbarrow and
was to be led by a string.

So on went Hans, thinking how everything turned out according to his
wishes, and how, if trouble overtook him, all was sure to be set right
directly. After a while he fell in with a peasant, who was carrying a
fine white goose under his arm. They bid each other good-day, and Hans
began to tell about his luck, and how he had made so many good
exchanges. And the peasant told how he was taking the goose to a
christening feast.

"Just feel how heavy it is," said he, taking it up by the wings; "it has
been fattening for the last eight weeks; and when it is roasted, won't
the fat run down!"

"Yes, indeed," said Hans, weighing it in his hand, "very fine to be
sure; but my pig is not to be despised."

Upon which the peasant glanced cautiously on all sides, and shook his
head.

"I am afraid," said he, "that there is something not quite right about
your pig. In the village I have just left one had actually been stolen
from the bailiff's yard. I fear, I fear you have it in your hand; they
have sent after the thief, and it would be a bad look-out for you if it
was found upon you; the least that could happen would be to be thrown
into a dark hole."

Poor Hans grew pale with fright. "For heaven's sake," said he, "help me
out of this scrape, I am a stranger in these parts; take my pig and give
me your goose."

"It will be running some risk," answered the man, "but I will do it
sooner than that you should come to grief." And so, taking the cord in
his hand, he drove the pig quickly along a by-path, and lucky Hans went
on his way home with the goose under his arm. "The more I think of it,"
said he to himself, "the better the bargain seems; first I get the roast
goose; then the fat; that will last a whole year for bread and dripping;
and lastly the beautiful white feathers which I can stuff my pillow
with; how comfortably I shall sleep upon it, and how pleased my mother
will be!"

And when he reached the last village, he saw a knife-grinder with his
barrow; and his wheel went whirring round, and he sang,

    "My scissors I grind, and my wheel I turn;
    And all good fellows my trade should learn,
    For all that I meet with just serves my turn."

And Hans stood and looked at him; and at last he spoke to him and said,

"You seem very well off, and merry with your grinding."

"Yes," answered the knife-grinder, "my handiwork pays very well. I call
a man a good grinder who, every time he puts his hand in his pocket
finds money there. But where did you buy that fine goose?"

"I did not buy it, but I exchanged it for my pig," said Hans.

"And the pig?"

"That I exchanged for a cow."

"And the cow?"

"That I exchanged for a horse."

"And the horse?"

"I gave for the horse a lump of gold as big as my head."

"And the gold?"

"Oh, that was my wage for seven years' service."

"You seem to have fended for yourself very well," said the
knife-grinder. "Now, if you could but manage to have money in your
pocket every time you put your hand in, your fortune is made."

"How shall I manage that?" said Hans.

"You must be a knife-grinder like me," said the man. "All you want is a
grindstone, the rest comes of itself: I have one here; to be sure it is
a little damaged, but I don't mind letting you have it in exchange for
your goose; what say you?"

"How can you ask?" answered Hans. "I shall be the luckiest fellow in the
world, for if I find money whenever I put my hand in my pocket, there is
nothing more left to want."

And so he handed over the goose to the pedlar and received the
grindstone in exchange.

"Now," said the knife-grinder, taking up a heavy common stone that lay
near him, "here is another proper sort of stone that will stand a good
deal of wear and that you can hammer out your old nails upon. Take it
with you, and carry it carefully."

Hans lifted up the stone and carried it off with a contented mind. "I
must have been born under a lucky star!" cried he, while his eyes
sparkled for joy. "I have only to wish for a thing and it is mine."

After a while he began to feel rather tired, as indeed he had been on
his legs since daybreak; he also began to feel rather hungry, as in the
fulness of his joy at getting the cow, he had eaten up all he had. At
last he could scarcely go on at all, and had to make a halt every
moment, for the stones weighed him down most unmercifully, and he could
not help wishing that he did not feel obliged to drag them along. And on
he went at a snail's pace until he came to a well; then he thought he
would rest and take a drink of the fresh water. And he placed the stones
carefully by his side at the edge of the well; then he sat down, and as
he stooped to drink, he happened to give the stones a little push, and
they both fell into the water with a splash. And then Hans, having
watched them disappear, jumped for joy, and thanked his stars that he
had been so lucky as to get rid of the stones that had weighed upon him
so long without any effort of his own.

"I really think," cried he, "I am the luckiest man under the sun." So on
he went, void of care, until he reached his mother's house.




THE GOOSE GIRL.


THERE lived once an old Queen, whose husband had been dead many years.
She had a beautiful daughter who was promised in marriage to a King's
son living a great way off. When the time appointed for the wedding drew
near, and the old Queen had to send her daughter into the foreign land,
she got together many costly things, furniture and cups and jewels and
adornments, both of gold and silver, everything proper for the dowry of
a royal Princess, for she loved her daughter dearly. She gave her also a
waiting gentlewoman to attend her and to give her into the bridegroom's
hands; and they were each to have a horse for the journey, and the
Princess's horse was named Falada, and he could speak. When the time for
parting came, the old Queen took her daughter to her chamber, and with a
little knife she cut her own finger so that it bled; and she held
beneath it a white napkin, and on it fell three drops of blood; and she
gave it to her daughter, bidding her take care of it, for it would be
needful to her on the way. Then they took leave of each other; and the
Princess put the napkin in her bosom, got on her horse, and set out to
go to the bridegroom. After she had ridden an hour, she began to feel
very thirsty, and she said to the waiting-woman,

"Get down, and fill my cup that you are carrying with water from the
brook; I have great desire to drink."

"Get down yourself," said the waiting-woman, "and if you are thirsty
stoop down and drink; I will not be your slave."

[Illustration: GOOSE GIRL

    'O WIND, BLOW CONRAD'S HAT AWAY,
    AND MAKE HIM FOLLOW AS IT FLIES,
    WHILE I WITH MY GOLD HAIR WILL PLAY
    AND BIND IT UP IN SEEMLY WISE.' ]

And as her thirst was so great, the Princess had to get down and to
stoop and drink of the water of the brook, and could not have her gold
cup to serve her. "Oh dear!" said the poor Princess. And the three drops
of blood heard her, and said,

"If your mother knew of this, it would break her heart."

But the Princess answered nothing, and quietly mounted her horse again.
So they rode on some miles farther; the day was warm, the sun shone hot,
and the Princess grew thirsty once more. And when they came to a
water-course she called again to the waiting-woman and said,

"Get down, and give me to drink out of my golden cup." For she had
forgotten all that had gone before. But the waiting-woman spoke still
more scornfully and said,

"If you want a drink, you may get it yourself; I am not going to be your
slave."